# Exoplanet_Detection_Using_ML
Exoplanets, the planets that orbit other stars outside the solar system, have captivated scientists across various fields. They hold the potential to provide insights into the origins of life on Earth, the evolution of the solar system, and the possibility of finding habitable planets. Traditional detection methods like gravitational microlensing and direct imaging are time-consuming and labor-intensive. Hence, leveraging classical Machine Learning techniques can significantly expedite exoplanet identification.

This project aims to use supervised and unsupervised Machine Learning methods to identify exoplanets from the Kepler Objects of Interest (KOI) dataset, which includes potential exoplanet candidates. By automating the identification process, the project seeks to reduce human effort and enhance efficiency.

## Introduction
The primary objective of the model is to predict the presence of exoplanets among the Kepler Objects of Interest (KOI), classified as potential exoplanet candidates. By automating the identification process, this project aims to streamline the detection of exoplanets and achieve results more efficiently.

## Literature Survey
The following papers were studied to inform the approach and methodology of this project:

  - "Identifying Exoplanets with Machine Learning Methods": This paper explores the use of machine learning models for exoplanet identification. It performs three-categorical classification with false positive, candidate, and confirmed classes on the Kepler dataset. Multiple models, including Decision Tree, Random Forest, Naive Bayes, and Multilayer Perceptron, were trained, achieving accuracies ranging from 88.50% to 99.79%. The study emphasizes the importance of evaluating model performance using metrics such as ROC and precision-recall curves.

  - "Comparing Classification Models on Kepler Data": This paper focuses on finding the most optimal classification model for classifying data into two categories: CANDIDATE or FALSE POSITIVE. Logistic Regression, Decision Trees, and Artificial Neural Network models were compared based on execution time, statistical significance tests, and prediction performance. The study found that Decision Trees outperformed Logistic Regression and Neural Network in terms of accuracy and relevancy, with respect to precision and recall.

## Dataset
### Dataset Description
The dataset used in this project is derived from the Kepler space observatory, launched by NASA in 2009. It consists of Kepler Objects of Interest (KOI) monitored by the observatory in its search for exoplanets. The data includes features such as orbital period, transit duration, transit depth, and flags indicating various properties of the KOIs.

### Data Preprocessing
The dataset underwent several preprocessing steps:

  - Missing values: Features with a high number of missing values were dropped, and samples with excessive missing feature values were removed. The remaining missing values were filled with the mean of the respective feature.

- Candidate exoplanet samples: Since the goal was to classify KOIs as exoplanets or non-exoplanets, all candidate exoplanet samples were dropped.

- Standardization: The data was standardized using mean and standard deviation.

- Highly correlated features: Features with a correlation value exceeding 0.95 were removed to address multicollinearity.

## Usage
  1. Clone the repository.
  
    git clone https://github.com/g-nerix/Exoplanet_Detection_Using_ML

  2. Run the main script ML_project_final.ipynb to train and evaluate the machine learning models.

  3. View the results and performance metrics generated by the models.

## Feedback and Contributions
We welcome any feedback, suggestions, or bug reports from our users. If you encounter any issues or have ideas for improvements, [please open an issue](https://github.com/g-nerix/Exoplanet_Detection_Using_ML/issues) on the GitHub repository.

If you would like to contribute to the project, feel free to [fork the repository](https://github.com/g-nerix/Exoplanet_Detection_Using_ML)/fork) and submit a pull request with your changes.

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. Feel free to use, modify, and distribute the code as per the terms of the license.

## Acknowledgments
We would like to express our gratitude to the open-source community for their valuable contributions and the resources that have helped make this app possible.

## Contact
If you have any further questions, you can reach out to us at shashank20119@iiitd.ac.in 
